# Deep Dive into Diffing and Reconciliation

## The Mysterious Bug ðŸ›

Imagine you render a component conditionally. If "something" is true, show me this component. Otherwise, show me
something else. For example, I'm developing a "sign up" form for my website, and part of that form is whether those who
sign up are a company or just a regular human fellow, for some crazy tax purposes. So I want to show the "Company Tax
ID" input field only after the user clicks the "yes, I'm signing up as a company" checkbox. And for people, show a
text "You don't have to give us your tax ID, lucky human."

The code for this app will look something like this:

```jsx
const Form = () => {
    const [isCompany, setIsCompany] = useState(false);
    return (
        <>
            {/* checkbox somewhere here */}
            {isCompany ? (
                <Input
                    id="company-tax-id-number"
                    placeholder="Enter your company Tax ID"
                />
            ) : (
                <TextPlaceholder/>
            )}
        </>
    );
};
```

What will happen here from a re-rendering and mounting perspective if the user actually claims that they are a company
and the value `isCompany` changes from the default false to true?

No surprises here, and the answer is pretty intuitive: the Form component will re-render itself, the `TextPlaceholder`
component will be unmounted, and the `Input` component will be mounted. If I flip the checkbox back, the `Input` will be
unmounted again, and the `TextPlaceholder` will be mounted.

From a behavioral perspective, all of this means that if I type something in the `Input`, flip the checkbox, and then
flip it back, whatever I typed there will be lost. Input has its own internal state to hold the text, which will be
destroyed when it unmounts and will be re-created from scratch when it mounts back.

But what will happen if I actually need to collect the tax ID from people as well? And the field should look and behave
exactly the same, but it will have a different id, different onChange callback, and other different settings. Naturally,
I'd do something like this:

```jsx
const Form = () => {
    const [isCompany, setIsCompany] = useState(false);
    return (
        <>
            {/* checkbox somewhere here */}
            {isCompany ? (
                <Input
                    id="company-tax-id-number"
                    placeholder="Enter your company Tax ID"
                />
            ) : (
                <Input
                    id="person-tax-id-number"
                    placeholder="Enter your personal Tax ID"
                />
            )}
        </>
    );
};
```

What will happen here now? The answer is, of course, again pretty intuitive and exactly as any sensible person would
expect... The unmounting doesn't happen anymore! If I type something in the field and then flip the checkbox, the text
is still there! React thinks that both of those inputs are actually the same thing, and instead of unmounting the first
one and mounting the second one, it just re-renders the first one with the new data from the second one.

## Diffing and Reconciliation ðŸ”„

It's all because of the DOM. Or to be precise, the fact that we don't have to deal with it directly when we're writing
React code. This is very convenient for us: instead of doing `appendChild` or comparing attributes manually, we just
write components. And then React transforms whatever we give to it into DOM elements on the screen with appropriate
data.

When we write code like this:

```jsx
const Input = ({placeholder}) => {
    return (
        <input
            type="text"
            id="input-id"
            placeholder={placeholder}
        />
    );
};

// somewhere else
<Input placeholder="Input something here"/>;
```

We expect React to add the normal HTML input tag with placeholder set in the appropriate place in the DOM structure. If
we change the placeholder value in the React component, we expect React to update our DOM element with the new value and
to see that value on the screen. Ideally, instantly.

So, React can't just remove the previous input and append a new one with the new data. That would be terribly slow.
Instead, it needs to identify that already existing input DOM element and just update its attributes. If we didn't have
React, we'd have to do something like this:

```js
const input = document.getElementById('input-id');
input.placeholder = 'new data';
```

In React, we don't have to; it handles it for us. It does so by creating and modifying what we sometimes call the "
Virtual DOM." This Virtual DOM is just a giant object with all the components that are supposed to render, all their
props, and their children - which are also objects of the same shape. Just a tree.

[Previous content...]

What the Input component from the example above should render will be represented as something like this:

```javascript
{
    type: "input", // type of element that we need to render
        props
:
    {
        // input's props like id or placeholder
        type: "text",
            id
    :
        "input-id",
            placeholder
    :
        "Input something here"
    }
    // ... bunch of other internal stuff
}
```

If our Input component was rendering something more complex:

```jsx
const Input = ({label}) => {
    return (
        <>
            <label htmlFor="input-id">{label}</label>
            <input type="text" id="input-id"/>
        </>
    );
};
```

Then label and input from React's perspective would be just an array of those objects:

```javascript
[
    {
        type: 'label',
        props: {
            htmlFor: 'input-id',
            children: label
        }
    },
    {
        type: 'input',
        props: {
            type: 'text',
            id: 'input-id'
        }
    }
]
```

DOM elements like `input` or `label` will have their "type" as strings, and React will know to convert them to the DOM
elements directly. But if we're rendering React components, they are not directly correlated with DOM elements, so React
needs to work around that somehow.

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    return <Input/>;
};
```

In this case, it will put the component's function as the "type." It just grabs the entire function that we know as the
Input component and puts it there:

```javascript
{
    type: Input // reference to that Input function we declared earlier
    // ... other stuff
}
```

And then, when React gets a command to mount the app (initial render), it iterates over that tree and does the
following:

- If the "type" is a string, it generates the HTML element of that type.
- If the "type" is a function (i.e., our component), it calls it and iterates over the tree that this function returned.

Until it eventually gets the entire tree of DOM nodes that are ready to be shown. A component like this, for example:

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    return (
        <div>
            <Input placeholder="Text1" id="1"/>
            <Input placeholder="Text2" id="2"/>
        </div>
    );
};
```

Will be represented as:

```javascript
{
    type: 'div',
        props
:
    {
        children: [
            {
                type: Input,
                props: {
                    id: "1",
                    placeholder: "Text1"
                }
            },
            {
                type: Input,
                props: {
                    id: "2",
                    placeholder: "Text2"
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

Which will on mounting resolve into HTML like this:

```jsx
<div>
    <input placeholder="Text1" id="1"/>
    <input placeholder="Text2" id="2"/>
</div>
```

## Reconciliation and State Update ðŸ”„

If we have this code:

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    // return just one element
    return <Input/>;
}
```

React will understand that the Component returns this object when rendered:

```javascript
{
    type: Input,
    // ... other internal stuff
}
```

[Previous content...]

It will compare the "type" field of that object from "before" and "after" the state update. If the type is the same, the
Input component will be marked as "needs update," and its re-render will be triggered. If the type has changed, then
React, during the re-render cycle, will remove (unmount) the "previous" component and add (mount) the "next" component.

If I were doing something conditional with that Input, like returning another component:

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    if (isCompany) return <Input/>;
    return <TextPlaceholder/>;
};
```

Then, assuming that the update was triggered by isCompany value flipping from true to false, the objects that React will
be comparing are:

```javascript
// Before update, isCompany was "true"
{
    type: Input
}
// After update, isCompany is "false"
{
    type: TextPlaceholder
}
```

You guessed the result, right? "Type" has changed from Input to TextPlaceholder references, so React will unmount Input
and remove everything associated with it from the DOM. And it will mount the new TextPlaceholder component and append it
to the DOM for the first time. Everything that was associated with the Input field, including its state and everything
you typed there, is destroyed.

## Reconciliation and Arrays ðŸ”„

Until now, I've only mentioned the fact of arrays in that data tree. But it's highly unlikely that anyone can write a
React app where every single component returns only one element. We need to talk about arrays of elements and how they
behave during re-renders in more detail now.

Even our simple Form actually has an array:

```jsx
const Form = () => {
    const [isCompany, setIsCompany] = useState(false);
    return (
        <>
            <Checkbox onChange={() => setIsCompany(!isCompany)}/>
            {isCompany ? <Input id="company-tax-id-number" ... /> : null}
            {!isCompany ? <Input id="person-tax-id-number" ... /> : null}
                </>
                );
            };
```

During re-render, when React sees an array of children instead of an individual item, it just iterates over it and then
compares "before" and "after" elements and their "type" according to their position in the array.

So, what will happen here when the state changes and re-render runs throughout the form?

Before, isCompany is false:

```javascript
[{type: Checkbox}, null, {type: Input}];
```

After, isCompany is true:

```javascript
[{type: Checkbox}, {type: Input}, null];
```

And when React starts comparing them, item by item, it will be:

- The first item, Checkbox before and after â†’ re-render Checkbox
- The second item, null before and Input after â†’ mount Input
- Third item, Input before, null after â†’ unmount Input

And voila! Magically, by changing the inputs' position in the render output, without changing anything else in the
logic, the bug is fixed, and inputs behave exactly as I would expect!

## Reconciliation and "key" ðŸ”‘

There is another way to fix the same bug: with the help of the "key" attribute.

The "key" should be familiar to anyone who has written any lists in React. React forces us to add it when we iterate
over arrays of data:

```jsx
const data = ['1', '2'];
const Component = () => {
    // "key" is mandatory here!
    return data.map((value) => <Input key={value}/>);
};
```

The output of this component should be clear by now: just an array of objects with the "type" Input:

```javascript
[
    {type: Input}, // "1" data item
    {type: Input}, // "2" data item
];
```

But the problem with dynamic lists like this is that they are, well, dynamic. We can re-order them, add new items at the
beginning or end, and generally mess around with them.

Now, React faces an interesting task: all components in that array are of the same type. How to detect which one is
which? If the order of those items changes:

```javascript
[
    {type: Input}, // "2" data item now, but React doesn't know that
    {type: Input}, // "1" data item now, but React doesn't know that
];
```

How to make sure that the correct existing element is re-used? Because if it just relies on the order of elements in
that array, it will re-use the instance of the first element for the data of the second element, and vice versa. This
will result in weird behavior if those items have state: it will stay with the first item. If you type something in the
first input field and re-order the array, the typed text will remain in the first input.

This is why we need "key": it's basically React's version of a unique identifier of an element within children's array
that is used between re-renders. If an element has a "key" in parallel with "type," then during re-render, React will
re-use the existing elements, with all their associated state and DOM, if the "key" and "type" match "before" and "
after." Regardless of their position in the array.

With this array, the data would look like this. Before re-ordering:

```javascript
[
    {type: Input, key: '1'}, // "1" data item
    {type: Input, key: '2'}, // "2" data item
];
```

After re-ordering:

```javascript
[
    {type: Input, key: '2'}, // "2" data item, React knows that because of "key"
    {type: Input, key: '1'}, // "1" data item, React knows that because of "key"
];
```

Now, with the key present, React will know that after re-render, it needs to re-use an already created element that used
to be in the first position. So it will just swap input DOM nodes around. And the text that we typed in the first
element will move with it to the second position.

## State Reset Technique ðŸ”„

This technique is known as "state reset". It has nothing to do with state per se, but it's sometimes used when there is
a need to reset the state of an uncontrolled component (like an input field) to a default value. You don't even have to
have two components for this, like I had above. One will do. Any unique value in key that changes depending on your
conditions will work for this.

If you want to force state reset on URL change, for example, it could be as simple as this:

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    // grab the current url from our router solution
    const {url} = useRouter();
    // I want to reset that input field when the page URL changes
    return <Input id="some-id" key={url}/>;
};
```

But be careful here, though. It's not just "state reset" as you can see. It forces React to unmount a component
completely and mount a new one from scratch. For big components, that might cause performance problems. The fact that
the state is reset is just a by-product of this total destruction.

## Using "key" to Force Reuse ðŸ”‘

Another fun fact: if we actually needed to reuse an existing element, "key" could help with that as well. Remember this
code, where we fixed the bug by rendering the Input element in different positions in the children array?

```jsx
const Form = () => {
    const [isCompany, setIsCompany] = useState(false);
    return (
        <>
            <Checkbox onChange={() => setIsCompany(!isCompany)}/>
            {isCompany ? <Input id="company-tax-id-number" ... /> : null}
            {!isCompany ? <Input id="person-tax-id-number" ... /> : null}
                </>
                );
            };
```

When the isCompany state variable changes, Input components will unmount and mount since they are in different positions
in the array. But! If I add the "key" attribute to both of those inputs with the same value, the magic happens:

```jsx
<>
    <Checkbox onChange={() => setIsCompany(!isCompany)}/>
    {isCompany ? <Input id="company-tax-id-number" key="tax-input" ... /> : null}
    {!isCompany ? <Input id="person-tax-id-number" key="tax-input" ... /> : null}
        </>
```

From the data and re-renders' perspective, it will now be like this.
Before, isCompany is false:

```javascript
[
    {type: Checkbox},
    null,
    {type: Input, key: 'tax-input'}
];
```

After, isCompany is true:

```javascript
[
    {type: Checkbox},
    {type: Input, key: "tax-input"},
    null
];
```

React sees an array of children and sees that before and after re-renders, there is an element with the Input type and
the same "key." So it will think that the Input component just changed its position in the array and will re-use the
already created instance for it. If we type something, the state is preserved even though the Inputs are technically
different.

For this particular example, it's just a curious behavior, of course, and not very useful in practice. But I could
imagine it being used for fine-tuning the performance of components like accordions, tabs content, or some galleries.

## Why We Don't Need Keys Outside of Arrays? ðŸ¤”

Have you noticed that React never forced you to add keys to anything unless you're iterating over an array?

The object definition of this:

```jsx
const data = ['1', '2'];
const Component = () => {
    // "key" is mandatory here!
    return (
        <>
            {data.map((value) => (
                <Input key={value}/>
            ))}
        </>
    );
};
```

and this:

```jsx
const Component = () => {
    // no-one cares about "key" here
    return (
        <>
            <Input/>
            <Input/>
        </>
    );
};
```

will be exactly the same, just a fragment with two inputs as a children array:

```javascript
[{type: Input}, {type: Input}];
```

The difference is that the first example is a dynamic array. React doesn't know what you will do with this array during
the next re-render: remove, add, or rearrange items, or maybe leave them as-is. So it forces you to add the "key" as a
precautionary measure, in case you're messing with the array on the fly.

[Previous content...]

## Mixing Dynamic Arrays and Static Elements ðŸ”„

Here's an interesting edge case that might cause concern: what happens when we mix dynamic arrays with static elements?
Consider this code:

```jsx
const data = ['1', '2'];
const Component = () => {
    return (
        <>
            {data.map((i) => (
                <Input key={i} id={i}/>
            ))}
            {/* Static input after dynamic array */}
            <Input id="3"/>
        </>
    );
};
```

### The Potential Concern ðŸ˜°

At first glance, you might worry that this would be represented as a flat array:

```javascript
[
    {type: Input, key: '1'}, // input from the array
    {type: Input, key: '2'}, // input from the array
    {type: Input},           // static input after the array
];
```

If this were the case, adding a new item to `data` would be problematic:

- The new item would take position 3
- The static Input would move to position 4
- React would see this as a new element and remount it
- Performance disaster! ðŸ”¥

### The Actual Solution ðŸ˜Œ

Fortunately, React is smarter than that! When mixing dynamic and static elements, React:

1. Creates an array of dynamic elements
2. Makes that entire array the first child in the children's array

The actual internal representation looks like this:

```javascript
[
    // First child: The entire dynamic array
    [
        {type: Input, key: '1'},
        {type: Input, key: '2'}
    ],
    // Second child: The static input
    {
        type: Input
    }
]
```

> ðŸ’¡ **Key Insight**: The static Input will always maintain its position as the second child, regardless of how many
> items are in the dynamic array. No remounting occurs when the dynamic array changes!

### Benefits of This Approach

- No unnecessary remounting
- Predictable behavior
- Better performance
- Maintains component state correctly

This clever implementation ensures that mixing dynamic and static elements is both safe and efficient.